Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to begin working on our login feature, let's jump right into the action.
All right.
So in the top right corner of our design, we have this username and password login form.
And our goal in this lesson is to let users submit this form and then determine if the username and
password that they typed in is correct.
Right.
Is it successfully matching one of the existing user documents in our database?
If it is correct, we can send back a message that says congratulations.
If it's incorrect, we can send back a message that says invalid username and password.
OK, so our first step to get started with this is to add a new route to our app.
Actually, before we add a new route, we need to make sure that we know which you are.
All this HTML form is submitting to.
Let me show you what I mean.
So jump into your text editor and within our views folder, open up the file named home dash guest dot
SJS.
A round line number 17 we see in opening form tag, this is the login form right now, we can see its
action is set to a placeholder hash tag, but let's go ahead and change that hash tag to a slash login.
Right.
So this way, when the user submits this form, the browser is going to send a post request to that.
You are out.
Let's go ahead and save this file.
And now let's go set up the route to match this.
You are out.
So in our project folder, open up router J.S..
Maybe right below this route or post register line, let's add a new line and let's say router dot post,
right.
This is if they send a post request, not a request.
And for the first argument, it would just be quotes and then slash login and then a comma.
And the second argument is a function that we want to call in response to this happening.
So we would want to use our user controller and we would want to look inside it.
And in just a minute or two from now, we can create a function named log in.
Let's go ahead and save this file.
And now we better go create a function with this matching name within our user controller.
Right.
We don't want to call a function that doesn't actually exist.
So within our project folder, let's dig in to our controllers folder.
And inside it, let's open up user controller J.S. You can see that I actually already have a function
named log in.
You might remember that we created these empty functions back when we first set up our user controller,
just as an example to show you that our controller will have multiple functions.
So if you don't already have this code that I'm highlighting right now, go ahead and type this in.
So it's within our user controller.
We're just saying exports dot login equals an anonymous function.
Now, within the parentheses for this function, let's add two parameters, request and response, OK?
And then within the body of this function, let's use our user model to create a new user object so
we can just say let lowercase user equal a new instance of uppercase user within the parentheses for
uppercase user.
Let's pass it the form data that the user just submitted.
So request dot body.
OK, and then on the next line of code, let's look inside our lowercase user object.
So user dot and then let's call an imaginary method that does not even exist yet.
But let's call user dot login.
OK, now we can just go within our user model file and create a method named log in.
Remember, it's the model, not the controller, that should handle all of our business logic and managing
all of our data.
So in terms of looking up a user name and password in the database, that should definitely be done
in our model, not in our controller.
So let's go ahead and save this file and then let's jump in to our models folder and open up the file
named uppercase user J.S..
OK, now we want to add a method named log in.
So I'm going to scroll down a bit and maybe right after our validate function is where I will add log
in.
So right below validate and right above our register function, I'll add a new line and just say user
and that's uppercase user Dot Prototyp dot log in equals an anonymous function, OK, within the body
of this function, let's begin by calling our clean up method.
So this dot clean up, remember this will check to make sure that the values are strings of text.
OK, after that what we want to do is look in our database and before we even worry about the password
value at all, we want to focus on the user name value.
Meaning is there even an existing user document with the matching user name that a visitor just tried
to log in with?
So right below this this clean up line, let's add a new line and let's use our users collection.
Right.
This is an object that represents our database collection and then we can perform CRUD operations on
it.
In this case, we are interested in the ah in crud which is read.
We want to read or load or look up data from the database.
So let's call a method so users collection dot and the name of the method is find one.
We're going to give this method to arguments so we could say A comma B as placeholders for the first
argument.
Instead of this a placeholder, we want to give it an object.
So curly brackets.
And this is where we tell Mongo what we are trying to find.
So let's say we are trying to find a document where the user name, property or field, so username
name is matching whatever the user just typed in.
So that would be this dot data dot user name.
OK, now for the second argument in.
Instead of this be placeholder, we provide a function that find one is going to call once this operation
has had a chance to complete because we don't know how long it's going to take the database to perform
the find action could take five milliseconds or it could take five thousand milliseconds.
So let's get rid of the B placeholder and provide an anonymous function function parentheses, curly
brackets within the parentheses.
For this function, let's provide two parameters IRR for error and attempted user.
I just made this name up.
You could technically choose anything here.
The idea is that if Mongo DB does find a user that matches our condition, it's going to pass that document
as this parameter into our function.
OK, now within the curly brackets for our function, let's drop down.
I just zoomed out a bit so it's easier to see all of this code at once.
OK, now within the body of our function, let's set up an if else.
So if parentheses curly brackets right after that closing curly bracket, let's say else curly brackets.
OK, and now let's set up the if condition to check to see if the username and password is a successful
match.
So within the parentheses, let's first just see if attempted user exists at all.
Right, because if Mongo is not able to find a document with that matching username, then this variable
will just not exist at all here.
So this will only evaluate to true if there is a matching username and then still within our condition
parentheses, let's say.
And and and now we just want to check to see if the password for that user document matches the password
that the visitor just sent over.
So after our ampersands will just say attempted user dot password and then double equals sign to check
for equality and then just check it against whatever the visitor just submitted.
So this data dot password.
However, in this context, we need to be sure that the this keyword is not going to come back to bite
us.
What I mean is when the find one method calls our callback function well, because it's not an object
directly calling our function JavaScript is actually going to consider the global object to be what's
calling our function.
So that's what it's going to set this keyword to instead of our lowercase user object that we created
from our blueprint.
Luckily, there's an easy way to get around this.
Instead of providing a regular or traditional anonymous function, we can instead provide an arrow function
to convert this into an arrow function.
All we need to do is get rid of the word function, but still keep the parentheses right after where
the word function was.
And then right after these parameter parentheses and before the curly brackets, we just say equal sign
greater than squished together to form this arrow shape.
One of the great things about an arrow function is that it does not manipulate or change the this keyword.
So whatever the this keyword was set to outside of this function is what it will still equal.
In other words, now when we say this dot data, dot password, this will be pointing towards what we
want it to be pointing towards.
OK, now let's fill out our if else.
So if this is true, that means the user just typed in a correct username and password.
It matches something in our existing database.
So within the if curly brackets, just as a test, why don't we log to the console and say congrats
and then within the else we can log to the console and say invalid username, password.
So console log, invalid username and password.
All right, let's go ahead and save this file and then be sure to open up your command line.
And now let's go take it for a test drive.
So within the browser, be sure to refresh your homepage so that your form submits to log in.
After you refresh, lets try to log in first with a bogus username and a bogus password.
So back in our console, cool.
We see invalid username slash password.
All right, let's try again in the browser.
If you refresh the homepage, localhost three thousand.
Let's try to log in with a valid username, but with a.
OGAs password back in the command line again, perfect, we see invalid username and password, OK,
back in the browser, let's try to successfully log in.
So type in your real username and your real password back in the console.
Awesome.
We see.
Congrats, except we don't actually want to log these result messages to the console.
What we actually want to do is send back a response to the visitors browser.
Right.
Because if I go back to the browser, eventually it's going to time out because our slash login route
never sends back a response.
So instead of these console log messages here, we would want to use response dot send, except it's
not the job of our model to send back a response for that route.
That is the job of our controller.
So right now, let's switch files and jump into our user controller JS file within the controllers log
in function.
You can see we are creating a user object and then we are calling the login method that we just set
up in our model file.
So our first instinct would be maybe right below that to send back a response.
So response send and then a bit of text.
But we would run into the issue of how do we know whether to send back a congrats message or a sorry
invalid username password message?
Well, there's many different ways we could set this up so we could set up our user model to add a property
onto our object, and that could say whether it's been successful or not.
And then we could access that property by just saying user dot success or user login status.
But even with that approach, we'd still run into an issue.
And that is we're not exactly sure when to send back our response.
The key word there is when.
So let's delete this response dot send line.
The problem here is we don't know how long this login method is going to take because it's working with
the database.
It could take five milliseconds or it could take twenty seconds.
We just don't know.
So the question becomes within our controller here, how can we wait until login has had a chance to
do its job and then send back our response to the browser?
Well, there are many different ways that we could set this up in this lesson.
We are going to use the traditional approach.
And then in our next lesson, we can learn about the modern best practice approach just because I don't
want to introduce too many new concepts or tasks in this one lesson.
So the traditional approach is called a callback function.
Since we don't know how long this is going to take, we can provide it a function as an argument.
So within these parentheses we could say function, parentheses, curly brackets.
OK, so this function is an argument that's going to get passed in to our login function.
So now back in our user model file.
Back in user.
Yes.
When we are defining what that login function should be within the parentheses for the function, let's
receive that incoming function with the parameter.
Let's call it callback.
OK, now we can leverage this.
So instead of console dialog, congrats, let's get rid of that and instead call our callback function
and we can give it an argument of a string of text and say congrats then let's do the same thing for
the fail message.
So instead of console log here, we can say callback for an argument, give it a string of text that
says invalid username and password.
OK, let's go ahead and save that and then jump back into our controller.
I realize there's a lot of moving parts here and room for confusion, but hang in there with me.
So we're passing this function as an argument into log in.
And then when we define that login function, we are waiting until the perfect moment to call this function.
In other words, we know that this function is not going to run until the appropriate moment once the
database action has had a chance to complete.
Now, let's also remember that when we called our callback function, we gave it these strings of text
as an argument.
So back in our controller within the parentheses here for this function, let's include a parameter,
let's call it result.
OK, now, within the body of this function, we can actually say response dot send.
Right.
We want to send a response back to the Web browser only instead of typing out a string of text here.
Let's just include result.
So whatever our model included when it called callback.
I realized there was a lot of room for confusion there, so you might need to watch this section back
a couple of times, or even if this is not making perfect sense, that's OK, because in our next lesson,
we are going to learn about a more modern and elegant way of setting this up.
However, I felt like I'd be doing you a disservice if I didn't first show you the traditional callback
way.
To be fair, the modern approach that we are going to learn in the next lesson is not as impressive
or fun unless you're aware of this old traditional way first.
So you have a frame of reference until fairly recently, until the last couple of years.
This callback method is the way that you would typically handle this situation.
All right.
Let's go ahead and save this and take it for a test drive.
So back in the browser, if I visit the home page, you are localhost three thousand.
If I try a bogus login, cool.
We see invalid username and password, but if I go back and try my correct log in.
Awesome, we see congrats.
Now, before we worry about doing something actually useful, instead of just showing a congrats or
sorry message or in other words, before we actually learn how to, quote, log a user in, I first
want to cover a couple of best practices.
So in our very next lesson, we are going to learn about a replacement to the traditional callback approach.
We're going to learn about something called a promise.
Trust me, understanding promises is a huge part of working with modern JavaScript.
That should be a lot of fun.
So let's keep things rolling and I'll see you then.